---
layout: single
title:  "CS1010 Vim & Unix"
excerpt: CS1010 Vim & Unix 
header:
  teaser: posts/NUS_SOC.jpg
toc: true
tags:
  - Vim
  - Unix
  - CS1010
---

# Vim
- Pairing a command with `Shift` (or the capital letter version) usually means applying the action until the end of the line. So `Shift+D` deletes from the current cursor until the end of the line.

## Reformatting
- To indent **all the code**, use `gg=G`. Then all lines will be indented according to a specific style.

## Commenting Multiple Lines of Code
- Press `CTRL + Q` (on Windows) or `CTRL + V` (On Linux) to enter the `VISUAL BLOCK` Mode.
- Type `SHIFT-I` to insert in `VISUAL BLOCK` Mode. To comment, type `//` and then `ESC` to go back to Normal Mode  . Then the text `//` will be inserted in front of each line selected.
- To uncomment, select `//` on each line that you wish to uncomment, and `x` to delete them.

## Changing Names
### Changing the name of one type/variable/method call
Occasionally, we mix up our variable or our method name, and we need to fix it before the code runs correctly or compiles. Suppose we have
```
double perimeter = get_area();
```
and we realize that we should be calling `get_perimeter` instead. Instead of using backspace or delete to delete the characters one by one, we can use `cw` to change the word `get_area` into `get_perimeter`.

To do so, (i) place the cursor at the beginning of `get_area`. Remember to avoid using arrow keys or `h` or `l` to move letter-by-letter. You can use `w` or `b` for faster word-by-word navigation. (ii) type `cw` to remove the word `get_area` and enter INSERT mode. Now type `get_perimeter` to replace the method name and ESC to return back to NORMAL mode.

> Basically, the command we should memorize here is using `cw` to change one word.

### Changing multiple names on the same line
> Notice that this method applies to the words **in one line** only.

Sometimes we have multiple occurrences that we wish to change on the same line. Let's say:
```
int area = get_area();
```
and we realize that we should be calculating `perimeter` instead of `area`. \
One option is to use `cw` twice. But we could also use the substitute command, like so. \
Place the cursor on this line, and type `:s/area/perimeter/gc`, and then ENTER. Here is what it does:
- `:`allows us to issue a command to Vim
- `s/<what to substitute>/<substitute with this>/` tells Vim what we want to replace and replace with what.
- `g` stands for `global` and it says that we want to substitute all occurrences (in this line only)
- `c` is optional, and it tells Vim to confirm every replacement with us.

### Changing multiple occurrences in a block
If there are only a few lines and you can count the size of the scope within which you want to search and replace, you place your cursor at the beginning of the method and issue the command `:.,+4s/<what to substitue>/<substitue with this>`. Here `.` refers to the current line; `,` is a separator, `+4` refers to the next four lines.

Suppose your cursor is far away and you have the line number turned on. Let say the method above appears at Lines 125 to 131. You can issue the command `:125,131s/<what to substitute>/<substitute with this>`.

Alternatively, you can use VISUAL-LINE mode. Place the cursor at the beginning of the method, and press SHIFT-V. This enters the VISUAL-LINE mode. Now, navigate to select the scope within which you want to search and replace (5j or } works in this case), and press :. You will see that the command prompt is pre-filled with `:'<,'>` to signify the selected range. Continue typing `s/<what to substitute>/<substitute with this>` and ENTER.

### Changing all occurrences in a file
Let's say that you have a typo in a file, where you have named all variables `angel` instead of `angle`, and you want to fix all occurrences of this in the file. You can use `%` to signify that the range of substitution is the entire file.

The command `:%s/angle/angle/g` should replace all occurances for you.

## Typing Long Variable/Function Names
### Auto-completion
You can type CTRL-P or CTRL-N in INSERT mode to auto-complete a word. So you only need to type the long name the first time. Subsequently, type the prefix and auto-complete.

### Abbreviation
You can set up a temporary abbreviation in your `~/.vimrc`. Example
```
ab noc num_of_customers
```
After the configuration is read, you only need to type noc in your code and it will be automatically expanded to `num_of_customers`.

This is useful for functions from the CS1010 library, such as `cs1010_println_long`, as well.

## Fixing Mistakes
### Undo and Redo
`u` undoes the last action. `CTRL+R` redoes the action.

# Unix
## Terminal Control Sequence
`CTRL` + `D`: signal the end of input to a program.
`CTRL` + `Z`: suspend the current running program.
`CTRL` + `C`: terminate the current running program.
`CTRL` + `S`: freeze the terminal.
`CTRL` + `Q`: resume the terminal.

> Note that often hitting `CTRL` + `Z` will causing the resources not freed in time. So, try to use `CTRL` + `C` instead.

# Credit
1. [CS1010 Handbook - Vim Common Operations](https://nus-cs1010.github.io/2425-s1/guides/vim-operations.html)
2. [CS1010 Handbook - Unix Background](https://nus-cs1010.github.io/2425-s1/guides/unix-background.html)
